.\"
.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii foo.1
.\"
.\" Copyright 2005, by Shaul Karl. You may modify and distribute 
.\" this document for any purpose as long as this copyright notice
.\" remains intact.
.\"

.TH INADYN.CONF 5 "January, 2005" "Linux applications" "File formats and conventions"
.SH NAME
inadyn.conf \- configuration for the inadyn client for open DNS servers.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B inadyn
can read the very same options which can be present in the command line 
from a configuration file. This feature allows the user to write the
options only once, and avoids frequent retyping.

The format of the file follows the *NIX tradition:
.IP
a '#' character denotes a comment. 
.IP
The long options (those with '\-\-' in front) can also be placed at the 
beginning of the line without '\-\-' signs.
.IP
a \\ can be used as an escape character.
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS 1.
#Some comment about inadyn cfg file

\-\-username test \-\-password test \-\-update_period 60000 

\-\-alias test.homeip.net \-\-alias my.second.domain
 
.SS 2.
\-\-username test # user

\-\-password test 

update_period 60000  # some other param without '\-\-'

alias test.homeip.net 

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.SS "Other manual pages"
.RB inadyn(8).
.SS "Internet resources"
.B Inadyn
\'s home page is
.UR
http://inadyn.ina-tech.net.
.UE
.SH AUTHOR
.B inadyn
was written by Narcis Ilisei, <inarcis2002@hotpop.com>.

This manual page was written by Shaul Karl, <shaul@debian.org>, for the
.B Debian GNU/Linux
system, based on the readme.html file that is found in the source.



