.\"
.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii foo.1
.\"
.\" Copyright 2004, by Shaul Karl. You may modify and distribute 
.\" this document for any purpose as long as this copyright notice
.\" remains intact.
.\"

.TH INADYN 8 "October, 2004" "Linux applications" "System management commands"
.SH NAME
inadyn \- a client for open DNS servers.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B inadyn
[\-h | \-\-help] [\-u | \-\-username
.I username
] [\-p | \-\- password
.I password
] [\-a | \-\-alias[,hash]
.I alias,hash
[\-a | \-\-alias[,hash]
.I another_alias,the_other_hash 
\ ... ]] [\-\-input_file 
.I path/name
] [\-\-ip_server_name
.I server[:port] url
] [\-\-dyndns_server_name[:port]
.I server[:port]
] [\-\-dyndns_system
.I service
] [\-\-proxy_server[:port]
.I proxy[:port]
] [\-\-update_period
.I ms
] [\-\-update_period_sec
.I sec
] [\-\-forced_update_period
.I sec
] [\-\-pid_file
.I path/name
] [\-\-log_file
.I path/name
] [\-\-background] [\-\-verbose
.I level
] [\-\-iterations
.I iterations
] [\-\-syslog]
] [\-\-change_persona 
.I uid[:gid]
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B inadyn
is a client for `open' name servers. That is, it let the user have an
Internet recognized name for his machine by transferring to him some
control over a name server that he does not manage. Some of the 
services that are offered by those open name servers are free of 
charge, and work even when the client machine does not have a static
IP.
The name servers that are supported by 
.B inayn
are:
.UR
http://www.dyndns.org
.UE
and
.UR
http://freedns.afraid.org
.UE

Its basic operation is to periodically check whether the actual IP
of the client machine is the same one that is recorded in the name
server, and update the name server records when there is a mismatch.
.SS OPTIONS
.TP
.I "\-h, \-\-help"
Print a summary of the options to
.B inadyn
and exit.
.TP
.I "\-u, \-\-username"
The username, if applicable. This might be referred to as hash.
.TP
.I "\-p, \-\-password"
The password, if applicable.
.TP
.I "\-a, \-\-alias[,hash]"
A host name alias. This option can appear multiple times, for each
domain that has the same IP.
.TP
.I \-\-input_file
The file name that contains inadyn command options exactly as specified in
the command line syntax (adds to those already present in the cmd
line). The default configuration file name is '/etc/inadyn.conf'. It is
looked at automatically if
.B inadyn
is called without any command line options. The format is as expected
for a **NIX config   the hash character is used to comment entire
lines. Spaces are ingored. The long options may be specified without 
\-\- if placed at the beginning of the line.
.TP
.I \-\-ip_server_name[:port] url
The client IP is detected by calling 'url' from this 'ip_server_name:port'.
Defaults to checkip.dyndns.org:80 /.
.TP
.I \-\-dyndns_server_name[:port]
The server that receives the update DNS requests. When no proxy is specified it is sufficient to set the
dyndns_system so that the default servers will be taken. The option is useful for generic DynDNS services that support HTTP update.
.TP
.I \-\-dyndns_server_url name
The update path inside the DynDNS server. 
.TP
.I \-\-dyndns_system
An optional DNS service. For 
.UR
http://www.dyndns.org
.UE
the acceptable services are one of dyndns@dyndns.org, statdns@dyndns.org
or custom@dyndns.org. There is only one acceptable service for
.UR
http://freedns.afraid.org
.UE
, which is default@freedns.afraid.org. Other services are: default@zoneedit.com, custom@http_svr_basic_auth. The default service is 
dyndns@dyndns.org, which is believed to be used by most users, at least
initially.
.TP
.I \-\-proxy_server[:port]
An http proxy server name and port. The default is none.
.TP
.I \-\-update_period
How often the IP is checked. This value denotes millisecond (There are
1000 milliseconds in one second). The default is about 1 minute. The
maximum is 10 days.
.TP
.I \-\-update_period_sec
How often the IP is checked. Here the value denotes seconds. The default
is about 1 minute. The maximum value is 10 days.
.TP
.I \-\-forced_update_period
How often the IP should be updated even if it is not changed. The time
should be given in seconds.
.TP
.I \-\-log_file
The name, including the full path, of a log file.
.TP
.I \-\-pid_file
The name, including the full path, of a file which holds inadyn's process id.
.TP
.I \-\-background
run in background. Output is sent to the UNIX syslog facilities 
or to a log file, if one was specified.
.TP
.I \-\-verbose
Set the debug level, which is an integer between 0 to 5.
.TP
.I \-\-iterations
Set the number of DNS updates. The default is 0, which means infinity.
.TP
.I \-\-syslog
Explicitly sending the output to a syslog like file, such as 
/var/log/messages.
.TP
.I \-\-change_persona uid[:gid]
After init changes user ID and group ID to the provided ones. This allows dropping unneeded [root] privileges after startup.


.SH "TYPICAL USAGE"
.SS
.UR
http://www.dyndns.org
.UE
.TP
.B inadyn
 \-u username \-p password \-a my.registered.name
.TP
.B inadyn
\-\-username test \-\-password test \-\-update_period 60000 
\-\-alias test.homeip.net \-\-alias my.second.domain
.TP
.B inadyn
\-\-background \-u test \-p test \-\-update_period 60000 
\-\-alias inarcis.homeip.net \-\-alias my.second.domain 
\-\-log_file inadyn_srv.log
.SS
.UR
http://freedns.afraid.org
.UE
.TP
.B inadyn
\-\-dyndns_service default@freedns.afraid.org \-a my.registrated.name,hash_from_freedns
.TP
.B inadyn
\-\-update_period 60000 \-\-alias test.homeip.net,hash_for_host1 
\-a my.second.domain,hash2 \-\-dyndns_system default@freedns.afraid.org
.PP
The 'hash' should be extracted from the grab url batch file that can be
downloaded from the site. A single hashed (base64 encoded) string is 
preferred upon a username and password pair, apparently to reduce the 
computational resources that is required on their side. Unfortunately
the hash can not be computed by inadyn because it requires the index to
the username record in the freedns database, which is not known. The
simplest solution seems to be a copy&paste action from the grab url batch
file offered on their website. When the batch file looks is like

graburl http://freedns.afraid.org/dynamic/update.php?YUGIUGSEIUFGOUIHEOIFEOIHJFEIO=

the hash string, which is what the user should copy and paste, is the 
string that begins right after the '?' character and ends with the end
of line. This string shell be used as the username in inadyn command.
When the user has several names then each name should be followed with
that name hash string.
.SH OUTPUT
.B
inadyn
prints a message when the IP is updated. If no update is needed then by
default it prints a single '.' character, unless \-\-verbose is set to 0.
Therefore, unless \-\-verbose is set to 0, the log file will contains lot
of dots. When the connection goes down it could be that 
.B inadyn
will print some error messages. Those are harmless and should be 
followed by 'OK' messages after the connection is back up.
.SH Signals
Any of the SIG_HUP, SIG_INT, SIG_QUIT will cause inadyn to terminate gracefully.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.SS "Other manual pages"
The syntax of the optional configuration file is given by
.BR inadyn.conf(5).
.SS "Internet resources"
.B Inadyn
\'s home page is
.UR
http://inadyn.ina-tech.net.
.UE
.SH AUTHOR
.B inadyn
was written by Narcis Ilisei, <inarcis2002@hotpop.com>.

This manual page was written by Shaul Karl, <shaul@debian.org>, for the
.B Debian GNU/Linux
system, based on the readme.html file that is found in the source.



