.\"  -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii foo.1
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2004       Shaul Karl.
.\" Copyright (C) 2010-2015  Joachim Nilsson.
.\"
.\" You may modify and distribute this document for any purpose, as
.\" long as this copyright notice remains intact.
.\"
.Dd July 14, 2015
.Dt INADYN 8 SMM
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm inadyn
.Nd a small DDNS client to maintain your presence on the Internet
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm inadyn
.Op Fl a, -alias Ar ALIAS
.Op Fl b, -background
.Op Fl B, -bind Ar IFNAME
.Op Fl d, -drop-privs Ar USER Ns Op : Ns Ar GROUP
.Op Fl e, -exec Ar SCRIPT
.Op Fl f, -forced-update Ar SEC
.Op Fl F, -config Ar FILE
.Op Fl L, -logfile Ar FILE
.Op Fl P, -pidfile Ar FILE
.Op Fl c, -cache-dir Ar PATH
.Op Fl h, -help
.Op Fl i, -iface Ar IFNAME
.Op Fl l, -syslog
.Op Fl n, -iterations Ar NUM
.Op Fl H, -checkip-url Ar SERVER Ns Oo : Ns Ar PORT Oc Ar URL
.Op Fl N, -server-name Ar SERVER Ns Op : Ns Ar PORT
.Op Fl U, -server-url Ar PATH
.Op Fl A, -append-myip
.Op Fl S, -system Ar PROVIDER
.Op Fl s, -ssl
.Op Fl o, -once
.Op Fl t, -startup-delay Ar SEC
.Op Fl T, -period Ar SEC
.Op Fl u, -username Ar USERNAME
.Op Fl p, -password Ar PASSWORD
.Op Fl v, -version
.Op Fl V, -verbose Ar LEVEL
.Op Fl w, -wildcard
.Op Fl x, -proxy-server Ar SERVER Ns Op : Ns Ar PORT
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a client for
.Dq open
name servers, also known as DDNS service providers.  That is,
it lets you have a public Internet name for your DHCP/PPPoE assigned system.  Some of
these services are free of charge for non-commercial use, others take a small fee,
but also provide more domains to choose from.
.Pp
Common DDNS service providers supported by
.Nm
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
.Aq http://www.dyndns.org
.It
.Aq http://freedns.afraid.org
.It
.Aq http://zoneedit.com
.It
.Aq http://www.no-ip.com
.It
.Aq http://www.easydns.com
.It
.Aq http://www.tzo.com
.It
.Aq http://www.3322.org
.It
.Aq http://www.dnsomatic.com
.It
.Aq http://www.tunnelbroker.net
.It
.Aq http://dns.he.net
.It
.Aq http://www.dynsip.org
.It
.Aq http://www.sitelutions.com
.It
.Aq http://www.dnsexit.com
.It
.Aq http://www.changeip.com
.It
.Aq http://www.zerigo.com
.It
.Aq http://www.dhis.org
.It
.Aq https://nsupdate.info
.It
.Aq http://duckdns.org
.It
.Aq https://www.loopia.com
.It
.Aq https://www.namecheap.com
.It
.Aq https://domains.google.com
.It
.Aq https://www.ovh.com
.It
.Aq https://www.dtdns.com
.It
.Aq http://giradns.com
.It
.Aq https://www.duiadns.net
.It
.Aq https://ddnss.de
.It
.Aq http://.dynv6.com
.It
.Aq http://ipv4.dynv6.com
.El
.Pp
DDNS providers not listed here, like
.Aq http://twoDNS.de ,
can often be configured using the generic DDNS provider plugin.  See
.Xr inadyn.conf 5
for example configurations.
.Pp
The basic operation of
.Nm inadyn
is to periodically check whether the actual Internet accessible IP of your system is
the same one that is recorded in the name server, and update the name server records
when there is a mismatch.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl h, -help
Print a summary of the options and exit
.It Fl u, -username Ar USERNAME
The username, if applicable. This might be referred to as hash
.It Fl p, -password Ar PASSWORD
The password, if applicable
.It Fl a, -alias Ar ALIAS
A host name alias. This option can appear multiple times, for each
domain that has the same IP
.It Fl F, -config Ar FILE
The file name that contains
.Nm inadyn
command options exactly as specified in the
command line syntax (adds to those already present on the cmd line). The default
configuration file name,
.Pa /etc/inadyn.conf ,
is looked at automatically if
.Nm inadyn
is called without any command line options. The format is as expected
for a UNIX config file; the hash character is used to comment entire
lines.  Spaces are ingored.  The long options may be specified without
\-\- if placed at the beginning of the line
.It Fl H, -checkip-url Ar SERVER Ns Oo : Ns Ar PORT Oc Ar PATH
Detect IP address by calling
.Ar PATH
from this
.Ar SERVER Ns Oo : Ns Ar PORT Oc .
Default:
.Aq http://checkip.dyndns.org
.It Fl N, -server-name Ar SERVER Ns Op : Ns Ar PORT
The server that receives the update DNS requests.  When no proxy is specified it is
sufficient to set the
.Fl -system
option so that the default servers will be taken. The
option is useful for generic DynDNS services that support HTTP update.
.It Fl U, -server-url Ar PATH
The update path on the DynDNS server.
.It Fl A, -append-myip
Appends your current IP, instead of the hostname alias, to the update
URL.  To use this setting you should encode the hostname alias in the
.Fl -server-url .
See example in
.Xr inadyn.conf 5
.It Fl S, -system Ar email@ddns-service.tld
DNS service to connect to.  Defaults to
.Ar default@dyndns.org .
.Bl -tag -width TERM -compact -offset indent
.It Cm default@dyndns.org
Connect to
.Aq http://www.dyndns.org ,
this is the default.
.It Cm default@freedns.afraid.org
.Aq http://freedns.afraid.org
.It Cm default@zoneedit.com
.Aq http://zoneedit.com
.It Cm default@no-ip.com
.Aq http://www.no-ip.com
.It Cm default@easydns.com
.Aq http://www.easydns.com
.It Cm default@tzo.com
.Aq http://www.tzo.com
.It Cm dyndns@3322.org
.Aq http://www.3322.org
.It Cm default@dnsomatic.com
.Aq http://www.dnsomatic.com
.It Cm dyndns@he.net
.Aq http://dns.he.net
.It Cm ipv6tb@he.net
.Em Deprecated OLD API
for
.Aq http://www.tunnelbroker.net
Users should migrate to
.Cm default@tunnelbroker.net .
.It Cm default@tunnelbroker.net
.Em NEW API
for
.Aq https://www.tunnelbroker.net
Please use this system for the IPv6 tunnelbroker service provided by
Hurricane Electric.  The old one works, but is deprecated.  See
.Xr inadyn.conf 5
for an example.
.It Cm default@dynsip.org
.Aq http://www.dynsip.org
.It Cm default@sitelutions.com
.Aq http://www.sitelutions.com
.It Cm default@dnsexit.com
.Aq http://www.dnsexit.com
.It Cm default@changeip.com
.Aq http://www.changeip.com
.It Cm default@zerigo.com
.Aq http://www.zerigo.com
.It Cm default@dhis.org
.Aq http://www.dhis.org
.It Cm ipv4@nsupdate.info
.Aq https://nsupdate.info
.It Cm default@duckdns.org
.Aq http://duckdns.org
.It Cm default@loopia.com
.Aq https://www.loopia.com
.It Cm default@duiadns.net
.Aq https://www.duiadns.net
.It Cm custom@http_srv_basic_auth
Try this if your DDNS service provider is not listed
.El
.It Fl x, -proxy-server Ar SERVER Ns Op : Ns Ar PORT
HTTP proxy server name and port.  Default: None
.It Fl T, -period Ar SEC
How often the IP is checked, in seconds. Default: apx 1 minute. Max: 10 days.
.It Fl f, -forced-update Ar SEC
How often the IP should be updated even if it is not changed. The time
should be given in seconds.  Default is equal to 30 days.
.It Fl L, -logfile Ar FILE
The name, including the full path, of a log file.  See also the
.Fl --syslog
option, below.
.It Fl b, -background
Run in background. Output is sent to the UNIX syslog facilities
or to a log file, if one was specified.
.It Fl V, -verbose Ar LEVEL
Set the debug level, which is an integer between
.Ar 0
to
.Ar 5 .
.It Fl n, -iterations Ar NUM
Set the number of DNS updates. The default is
.Ar 0 ,
which means infinity.
.It Fl l, -syslog
Use the system
.Xr syslog 3
mechanism for log messages, warnings and error conditions.
.It Fl d, -drop-privs Ar USER Ns Op : Ns Ar GROUP
Drop privileges after initial setup to the given user and group.
.It Fl B, -bind Ar IFNAME
Set interface to bind to. Only on UNIX systems.
.It Fl i, -iface Ar IFNAME
Set interface to check for IP. Only on UNIX systems.
External IP check is not performed
.It Fl P, -pidfile Ar FILE
Set pidfile, defaults to
.Pa /var/run/inadyn/inadyn.pid 
.It Fl c, -cache-dir Ar PATH
Set directory for persistent cache files, defaults to
.Pa /var/run/inadyn
.Pp
The cache files are used to keep track of which addresses have been
successfully sent to their respective DDNS provider and when.  The
latter 'when' is important to prevent
.Nm
from banning you for excessive updates.
.Pp
When restarting
.Nm
or rebooting your server, or embedded device,
.Nm
reads the cache files to seed its internal data structures with the last
sent IP address and when the update was performed.  It is therefore very
important to both have a cache file and for it to have the correct time
stamp.  The absence of a cache file will currently cause a forced
update.
.Pp
On an embedded device with no RTC, or no battery backed RTC, it is
strongly recommended to pair this setting with the
.Fl -startup-delay Ar SEC
option to ensure that an NTP client has set the device's clock before a
cache file is created or read.
.It Fl e, -exec Ar SCRIPT
Full path to external command, or script, to run after a successful
DDNS update
.Ar SCRIPT
can use following environment variables: INADYN_IP,
INADYN_HOSTNAME. First environment variable contains new IP address,
second one - host name alias. INADYN_IFACE is available, if
.Fl -iface
option used.
.It Fl w, -wildcard
Enable domain name wildcarding of your domain name, for DDNS providers
that support this, e.g. easydns.com and loopia.com.  This means that
anything typed before your hostname, e.g. www. or ftp., is also updated
when your IP changes.  Default: disabled.  For
.Nm inadyn
< 1.96.3 wildcarding was enabled by default
.It Fl t, -startup-delay Ar SEC
Initial delay at program startup.  Default is 0 seconds.  Any signal can
be used to abort the startup delay early, but SIGUSR2 is the recommended
to use.  See
.Sx SIGNALS
below for full details of how
.Nm
responds to signals.
.Pp
Intended to allow time for embedded devices without a battery backed
real time clock to set their clock via NTP at bootup.  This is so that
the time since the last update can be calculated correctly from the
cache file and the
.Fl -forced-update
option honored across reboots, avoiding unnecessary IP address updates
.It Fl s, -ssl
Use HTTPS to connect to this DDNS service provider, default HTTP
.It Fl o, -once
Force one update and quit
.It Fl z, -fake-address
When using SIGUSR1, to do a forced update, this option can be used to
fake an address update using the
.Dq random
address 203.0.113.42 (example IP address from RFC5737) before updating
with the actual IP address.  This is completely outside spec., but can
be useful for people who very rarely, if ever, get an IP address change.
Because some DDNS service providers will not register even a forced
update if the IP is the same.  As a result the user will likely be
deregistered as an inactive user.
.El
.Sh "TYPICAL USAGE"
.Ss http://www.dyndns.org
.Bl -column -compact
.It Nm
.Fl u
nick
.Fl p
secret
.Fl a
my.registered.name
.It Nm
.Fl u
nick
.Fl p
secret
.Fl T 60
.Fl a
test.homeip.net
.Fl a
my.second.domain
.It Nm
.Fl b
.Fl u
nick
.Fl p
secret
.Fl T
60
.Fl a
test.homeip.net
.Fl a
my.second.domain
.Fl L inadyn.log
.El
.Ss http://freedns.afraid.org
.Bl -column -compact
.It Nm
.Fl S
default@freedns.afraid.org
.Fl u
nick
.Fl p
secret
.Fl a
my.registered.name
.It Nm
.Fl S
default@freedns.afraid.org
.Fl u
nick
.Fl p
secret
.Fl T
60
.Fl a
test.homeip.net
.Fl a
my.second.domain
.El
.Pp
The hash is automatically retrieved by
.Nm inadyn
using the FreeDNS API.
.Sh OUTPUT
.Nm
prints a message when the IP is updated.  If no update is needed then by
default it prints a single
.Dq .\&
character, unless
.Fl -verbose
is set to
.Ar 0 .
Therefore, unless
.Fl -verbose
is set to
.Ar 0 ,
the log file will contains lot
of dots. When the connection goes down it could be that
.Nm
will print some error messages. Those are harmless and should be
followed by
.Dq OK
messages after the connection is back up.
.Sh SIGNALS
.Nm
responds to the following signals:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width TERM -compact
.It HUP
Reload the
.Nm .conf 
file, standard UNIX behavior
.It TERM
Tell
.Nm
to exit gracefully
.It INT
Same as TERM
.It USR1
Force update now, even if the IP address has not changed.  Works in
tandem with
.Fl -fake-address
.It USR2
Check IP address change now. Useful when a new DHCP/PPPoE lease or new
gateway is received.  Please note that
.Nm
does not track such events by itself.  You need an external monitor for
that
.El
.Pp
For convenience in sending signals,
.Nm
writes its process ID to
.Pa /var/run/inadyn/inadyn.pid
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /var/run/inadyn/inadyn.cache -compact
.It Pa /etc/inadyn.conf
.It Pa /var/run/inadyn/inadyn.pid
.It Pa /var/run/inadyn/dyndns.org.cache
.It Pa /var/run/inadyn/freedns.afraid.org.cache
.It Pa ... one .cache file per DDNS provider
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr inadyn.conf 5
.Pp
The
.Nm
home page is at GitHub:
.Aq https://github.com/troglobit/inadyn
.Sh AUTHORS
.Nm
was originally written by
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Narcis Ilisei
.Aq mailto:inarcis2002@hotpop.com
and
.It
Steve Horbachuk
.El
.Pp
It is now maintained at GitHub by
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Joachim Nilsson
.Aq mailto:troglobit@gmail.com
with a lot of help from
.It
Andrey Tikhomirov, and
.It
Mike Fleetwood
.El
.Pp
This manual page was originally written for the
.Em Debian GNU/Linux
project by
.An -nosplit
.An Shaul Karl Aq mailto:shaul@debian.org .
Currently maintained by
.An -nosplit
.An Joachim Nilsson.
