.\"  -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii foo.1
.\"
.\" Copyright 2005, by Shaul Karl.
.\" Copyright 2010, by Joachim Nilsson.
.\"
.\" You may modify and distribute this document for any purpose, as
.\" long as this copyright notice remains intact.
.\"
.Dd November 27, 2013
.Dt INADYN 5 SMM
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm inadyn.conf
.Nd inadyn DDNS client configuration file
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm /etc/inadyn.conf
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm inadyn
can read the very same command line options from a configuration file.
This feature allows the user to write the options only once, and avoids
frequent retyping.
.Pp
The format of the file follows the UN*X tradition:
.Bl -bullet -offset abcd
.It
The
.Dq #\&
character denotes a comment. 
.It
Settings are currently the same as the long command line options (those
with
.Dq \-\-
), only without the dashes.  See example below.
.It
The \\ character can be used as an escape character.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLE
.br
background
.br
verbose        1
.br
period         300
.br
startup-delay  60
.br
# logfile      /var/log/inadyn.log
.br
# pidfile      /var/run/inadyn.pid
.br
cache-dir      /etc/inadyn
.Pp
# Primary account, used for most operations
.br
system default@dyndns.org
.br
    ssl
.br
    username account
.br
    password secret
.br
    alias my.example.com
.br
    alias other.example.org
.Pp
# Secondary account, on another DDNS provider
.br
# also updated on IP change
.br
system default@no-ip.com
.br
    username account
.br
    password secret
.br
    alias example.no-ip.com
.Pp
# Tertiary account at Loopia
.br
system default@loopia.com
.br
    ssl
.br
    wildcard
.br
    username account
.br
    password secret
.br
    alias example.com
.Pp
# IPv6 account at https://tunnelbroker.net
.br
system default@tunnelbroker.net
.br
    ssl
.br
    username xyzzy
.br
    password update-key-in-advanced-tab
.br
    alias tunnel-id
.Pp
# Generic example for twoDNS.de
.br
system custom@http_srv_basic_auth
.br
    ssl
.br
    checkip-url checkip.two-dns.de /
.br
    server-name update.twodns.de
.br
    server-url /update?hostname=
.br
    username account
.br
    password secret
.br
    alias example.dd-dns.de
.br
.Pp
As of Inadyn 1.99.14 the generic plugin can also be used with providers
that require the client's IP in the update request, as
.Aq http://dyn.com
requires:
.Pp
# This emulates default@dyndns.org
.br
system custom@http_srv_basic_auth
.br
    alias YOURHOST
.br
    server-name members.dyndns.org
.br
    ssl
.br
    server-url /nic/update?hostname=YOURHOST.dyndns.org&myip=
.br
    append-myip
.br
    username DYNUSERNAME
.br
    password DYNPASSWORD
.Pp
Notice the use of
.Nm append-myip
which differs from above previous examples.  Without this option set the
default (backwards compatible) behavior is to add the hostname alias.
.Sh "SEE ALSO"
.Xr inadyn 8
.Pp
The
.Nm inadyn
home page is
.Aq http://github.com/troglobit/inadyn
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was initially written for the
.Em Debian GNU/Linux
system by
.An -nosplit
.An Shaul Karl Aq mailto:shaul@debian.org .
Currently maintained by
.An -nosplit
.An Joachim Nilsson Aq mailto:troglobit@gmail.com .
