.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.TH PARTPROBE 8 "March 18, 2002" parted "GNU Parted Manual"
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.SH NAME
partprobe \- inform the OS of partition table changes
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B partprobe
.RI [ -d ]
.RI [ -s ]
.RI [ devices... ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page documents briefly the
.B partprobe
command.
.PP
.\" TeX users may be more comfortable with the \fB<whatever>\fP and
.\" \fI<whatever>\fP escape sequences to invode bold face and italics,
.\" respectively.
\fBpartprobe\fP is a program that informs the operating system kernel of
partition table changes, by requesting that the operating system re-read
the partition table.
.SH OPTIONS
This program uses short UNIX style options.
.TP
.B \-d
Don't update the kernel.
.TP
.B \-s
Show a summary of devices and their partitions.
.TP
.B \-h
Show summary of options.
.TP
.B \-v
Show version of program.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR parted (8).
.SH AUTHOR
This manual page was written by Timshel Knoll <timshel@debian.org>,
for the Debian GNU/Linux system (but may be used by others).
