.TH PARTED 8 "2007 March 29" parted "GNU Parted Manual"
.SH NAME
GNU Parted \- a partition manipulation program
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B parted
[options] [device [command [options...]...]]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B parted
is a program to manipulate disk partitions.  It supports multiple partition
table formats, including MS-DOS and GPT.  It is useful for creating space for
new operating systems, reorganising disk usage, and copying data to new hard
disks.
.PP
This manual page documents \fBparted\fP briefly.  Complete documentation is
distributed with the package in GNU Info format.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B -h, --help
displays a help message
.TP
.B -l, --list
lists partition layout on all block devices
.TP
.B -m, --machine
displays machine parseable output
.TP
.B -s, --script
never prompts for user intervention
.TP
.B -v, --version
displays the version
.TP
.B -a \fIalignment-type\fP, --align \fIalignment-type\fP
Set alignment for newly created partitions, valid alignment types are:
.RS
.IP none
Use the minimum alignment allowed by the disk type.
.IP cylinder
Align partitions to cylinders.
.IP minimal
Use minimum alignment as given by the disk topology information. This and
the opt value will use layout information provided by the disk to align the
logical partition table addresses to actual physical blocks on the disks.
The min value is the minimum alignment needed to align the partition properly to
physical blocks, which avoids performance degradation.
.IP optimal
Use optimum alignment as given by the disk topology information. This
aligns to a multiple of the physical block size in a way that guarantees
optimal performance.
.RE

.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B [device]
The block device to be used.  When none is given, \fBparted\fP will use the
first block device it finds.
.TP
.B [command [options]]
Specifies the command to be executed.  If no command is given,
.BR parted
will present a command prompt.  Possible commands are:
.RS
.TP
.B help \fI[command]\fP
Print general help, or help on \fIcommand\fP if specified.
.TP
.B align-check \fItype\fP \fIpartition\fP
Check if \fIpartition\fP satisfies the alignment constraint of \fItype\fP.
\fItype\fP must be "minimal" or "optimal".
.TP
.B mklabel \fIlabel-type\fP
Create a new disklabel (partition table) of \fIlabel-type\fP.  \fIlabel-type\fP
should be one of "aix", "amiga", "bsd", "dvh", "gpt", "loop", "mac", "msdos",
"pc98", or "sun".
.TP
.B mkpart \fIpart-type\fP \fI[fs-type]\fP \fIstart\fP \fIend\fP
Make a \fIpart-type\fP partition for filesystem \fIfs-type\fP (if specified),
beginning at \fIstart\fP and ending at \fIend\fP (by default in megabytes).
\fIpart-type\fP should be one of "primary", "logical", or "extended".
.TP
.B name \fIpartition\fP \fIname\fP
Set the name of \fIpartition\fP to \fIname\fP. This option works only on Mac,
PC98, and GPT disklabels. The name can be placed in quotes, if necessary.
.TP
.B print
Display the partition table.
.TP
.B quit
Exit from \fBparted\fP.
.TP
.B rescue \fIstart\fP \fIend\fP
Rescue a lost partition that was located somewhere between \fIstart\fP and
\fIend\fP.  If a partition is found, \fBparted\fP will ask if you want to
create an entry for it in the partition table.
.TP
.B rm \fIpartition\fP
Delete \fIpartition\fP.
.TP
.B select \fIdevice\fP
Choose \fIdevice\fP as the current device to edit. \fIdevice\fP should usually
be a Linux hard disk device, but it can be a partition, software raid device,
or an LVM logical volume if necessary.
.TP
.B set \fIpartition\fP \fIflag\fP \fIstate\fP
Change the state of the \fIflag\fP on \fIpartition\fP to \fIstate\fP.
Supported flags are: "boot", "root", "swap", "hidden", "raid", "lvm", "lba",
"legacy_boot" and "palo".
\fIstate\fP should be either "on" or "off".
.TP
.B unit \fIunit\fP
Set \fIunit\fP as the unit to use when displaying locations and sizes, and for
interpreting those given by the user when not suffixed with an explicit unit.
\fIunit\fP can be one of "s" (sectors), "B" (bytes), "kB", "MB", "MiB", "GB",
"GiB", "TB", "TiB", "%" (percentage of device size), "cyl" (cylinders), "chs"
(cylinders, heads, sectors), or "compact" (megabytes for input, and a
human-friendly form for output).
.TP
.B toggle \fIpartition\fP \fIflag\fP
Toggle the state of \fIflag\fP on \fIpartition\fP.
.TP
.B version
Display version information and a copyright message.
.RE
.SH REPORTING BUGS
Report bugs to <bug-parted@gnu.org>
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR fdisk (8),
.BR mkfs (8),
The \fIparted\fP program is fully documented in the
.BR info(1)
format
.IR "GNU partitioning software"
manual.
.SH AUTHOR
This manual page was written by Timshel Knoll <timshel@debian.org>,
for the Debian GNU/Linux system (but may be used by others).
